# **Aldy**

Aldy is a tool for allelic decomposition and exact genotyping of highly polymorphic and structurally variant genes.
More simply, it is a tool which can detect the copy number of a target gene, and the structure and genotype of each gene copy present in the sample.

Aldy has been published in [Nature Communications](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-018-03273-1) ([doi:10.1038/s41467-018-03273-1](http://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-03273-1)). Preprint [is available here](preprint.pdf). Full experimental pipeline [is available here](https://github.com/inumanag/aldy-paper-resources).

## Installation

Aldy is written in Python, and supports both Python 2.7 and 3. It is intended to be run on POSIX-based systems (only Linux and macOS have been tested).

The easiest way to install Aldy is to use `pip`:

    pip install git+https://github.com/inumanag/aldy.git

Add `--user` to install it locally if you cannot write to the system-wide Python directory.

### Prerequisite: ILP solver

Although Aldy can be installed without any ILP solver, it cannot produce any meaningful results without supported ILP solver. Unfortunately, as of now, none of the currently supported solvers can be installed automatically.

Solvers which are currently supported include:

  -  [Gurobi](http://www.gurobi.com) (**highly recommended**):
      a commercial solver which is free for academic purposes.
      After installing it, don't forget to install `gurobipy` package by going to Gurobi's installation directory (e.g. `/opt/gurobi/linux64` on Linux or `/Library/gurobi751/mac64/` on macOS) and issuing `python setup.py install`.
  - [SCIP](http://scip.zib.de/):
       another solver that is also free for academic purposes, and that is bit easier to obtain than Gurobi (no registration required). However, please note that it is slower than Gurobi **and that in some cases SCIP cannot find optimal solution in reasonable time**. Please bear in mind that the results from the paper were generated by Gurobi, although SCIP should provide the same results (given enough time). Once you install SCIP, please install [PySCIPPpt](https://github.com/SCIP-Interfaces/PySCIPOpt) module for the Python SCIP bindings.
       
       > **WARNING**: SCIP is currently **NOT RECOMMENDED**. It is order of magnitude slower (in some cases it might take hours instead of seconds), and sometimes it cannot find the optimal solution in timely manner. If you need correct and optimal results on more challenging samples (e.g. ones with multiple gene copies), please use Gurobi. Use SCIP at your own risk!

### Sanity check

After installing Aldy and the supported ILP solver, please make sure to test the installation by issuing the following command (this should take around a minute):

    aldy --test

In case everything is set up properly, you should see something like this:

```
Aldy Sanity-Check Test
Expected result is: *1/*4+*4

*** Aldy v1.2 (Python 3.6) ***
(c) 2017 SFU, MIT & IUB. All rights reserved.
Arguments:
  Gene:      CYP2D6
  Profile:   illumina
...[redacted]...
Result:
  *1/*4+*4                       (1, 4N, 4AW)
```


## Running

Aldy needs an aligned SAM, BAM, CRAM or DeeZ file for the analysis. Below we will use BAM as an example. 

**It is assumed that reads are mapped to hg19 or GRCh37. hg38 is not yet supported.**

An index is needed for BAM files. Get one by running:

    samtools index file.bam

Aldy is invoked as:

    aldy -p [profile] -g [gene] file.bam

The `[gene]` parameter indicates the name of the gene to be genotyped. Currently, Aldy supports *CYP2D6*, *CYP2A6*, *CYP2C19*, *CYP2C8*, *CYP2C9*, *CYP3A4*, *CYP3A5*, *CYP4F2*, *TPMT* and *DPYD*.


### Sequencing profile selection

The `[profile]` argument refers to the sequencing profile. The following profiles are available:

- `illumina` for Illumina WGS (or any uniform-coverage technology) samples. 

  **It is highly recommended to use samples with at least 40x coverage. Also, anything lower than 20x will result in tears and agony.**

- `pgrnseq-v1` for PGRNseq v.1 capture protocol data
- `pgrnseq-v2` for PGRNseq v.2 capture protocol data

In case you are using different technology (i.e. some home-brewed capture kit), you can use it provided that the following requirements are met:

- all samples have the similar coverage distribution (i.e. two sequenced samples with the same copy number configuration MUST have similar coverage profiles; please consult us if you are not sure about this)
- your panel includes a copy-number neutral region (currently, Aldy uses CYP2D8 as a copy-number neutral region)

Having said that, you can generate the profile for your panel/technology by running:

```bash
# Get the profile
aldy --generate-profile file.bam > my-cool-tech.profile
# Run Aldy
aldy -p my-cool-tech.profile -g [gene] file.bam
```

### Output

Aldy will generate the following files: `file-[gene].aldy` (default location can be changed via `-o` parameter), and `file-[gene].aldylog` (default location can be changed via `-l` parameter).  The summary of results are shown
at the end of the output:

```
$ aldy -p pgrnseq-v2 -g cyp2d6 NA19788_x.bam
*** Aldy v1.0 ***
(c) 2017 SFU, MIT & IUB. All rights reserved.
Arguments:
  Gene:      CYP2D6
  Profile:   pgrnseq-v2
  Threshold: 50%
  Input:     NA19788_x.bam
  Output:    NA19788_x.CYP2D6.aldy
  Log:       NA19788_x.CYP2D6.aldylog
Result:
  *2/*78+*2                      (2MW, 2MW, 78/2|2M)
```

In this example, *CYP2D6* genotype is \*2/\*78+\*2 as expressed in terms of major star-alleles. Minor star-alleles are given in the parenthesis (in this case, two copies of \*2MW, and one copy of \*78 fusion on the \*2M background).

Explicit decomposition is given in the `file-[gene].aldy` (in the example above, it is `NA19788_x.CYP2D6.aldy`). 
Example of such file is:

```
# Aldy v1.0
# Gene: CYP2D6
# Number of solutions: 1

# Solution 0
# Predicted diplotype: *2/*78+*2
# Composition: 2MW,2MW,78/2|2M
Copy   Allele   Location   Type     Coverage  Effect      dbSNP       Code        Status
0      78/2     42522311   SNP.CT   1760      NEUTRAL     rs12169962  4481:G>A    NORMAL
0      78/2     42522612   SNP.CG   1287      DISRUPTING  rs1135840   4180:G>C    NORMAL
...[redacted]...
1      2MW      42522311   SNP.CT   1760      NEUTRAL     rs12169962  4481:G>A    NORMAL
1      2MW      42527541   DEL.TC   0         NEUTRAL     rs536645539 -750:delGA  MISSING
...[redacted]...
```

Each solution is indicated with the **"Solution"** line. The first column (copy) shows the ordinary number of the allelic copy (e.g. 0, 1 and 2 for 2MW, 2MW and 78/2M, respectively). The following columns indicate:

- star-allele, 
- mutation loci,
- mutation type (SNP or indel), 
- mutation coverage, 
- mutation functionality:
  - `DISRUPTING` for gene-disrupting 
  - `NEUTRAL` for neutral mutation, 
- dbSNP ID (if available),
- traditional Karolinska-style mutation code from CYP allele database, and 
- mutation status, which indicates the status of the mutation in the decomposition:
  - `NORMAL`: mutation is associated with the star-allele in the database, and is found in the sample
  - `NOVEL`: gene-disrupting mutation is **NOT** associated with the star-allele in the database, 
    but is found in the sample (this indicates that Aldy found a novel major star-allele)
  - `EXTRA`: neutral mutation is **NOT** associated with the star-allele in the database, 
    but is found in the sample (this indicates that Aldy found a novel minor star-allele)
  - `MISSING`: neutral mutation is associated with the star-allele in the database, 
    but is **NOT** found in the sample (this also indicates that Aldy found a novel minor star-allele)

### Logging

Detailed execution log will be located in `file-[gene].aldylog`. It is used mainly for debugging purposes.


## Sample datasets

Sample datasets are also available for download. They include:

- [HG00463](http://cb.csail.mit.edu/cb/aldy/data/HG00463.bam) (PGRNseq v.2), containing *CYP2D6* configuration with multiple copies
- [NA19790](http://cb.csail.mit.edu/cb/aldy/data/NA19790.bam) (PGRNseq v.2), containing a fusion between *CYP2D6* and *CYP2D7* deletion (\*78 allele)
- [NA24027](http://cb.csail.mit.edu/cb/aldy/data/NA24027.bam) (PGRNseq v.1), containing novel *DPYD* allele and multiple copies of *CYP2D6*
- [NA10856](http://cb.csail.mit.edu/cb/aldy/data/NA10856.bam) (PGRNseq v.1), containing *CYP2D6* deletion (\*5 allele)
- [NA10860](http://cb.csail.mit.edu/cb/aldy/data/NA10860.bam) (Illumina WGS), containing 3 copies of *CYP2D6*. This sample contains only *CYP2D6* region.

Expected results are:

| Gene (`-g`) | HG00463             | NA19790        | NA24027         | NA10856    | NA10860      |
|-------------|---------------------|----------------|-----------------|------------|--------------|
| *CYP2D6*    | \*36+\*10/\*36+\*10 |  \*1/\*78+\*2  |  \*6/\*2+\*2    |  \*1/\*5   |  \*1/\*4+\*4 |
| *CYP2A6*    | \*1/\*1             |  \*1/\*1       |  \*1/\*35       |  \*1/\*1   |              |
| *CYP2C19*   | \*1/\*3             |  \*1/\*1       |  \*1/\*2        |  \*1/\*2   |              |
| *CYP2C8*    | \*1/\*1             |  \*1/\*3       |  \*1/\*3        |  \*1/\*1   |              |
| *CYP2C9*    | \*1/\*1             |  \*1/\*2       |  \*1/\*2        |  \*1/\*2   |              |
| *CYP3A4*    | \*1/\*1             |  \*1/\*1       |  \*1/\*1        |  \*1/\*1   |              |
| *CYP3A5*    | \*3/\*3             |  \*3/\*3       |  \*1/\*3        |  \*1/\*3   |              |
| *CYP4F2*    | \*1/\*1             |  \*3/\*4       |  \*1/\*1        |  \*1/\*1   |              |
| *TPMT*      | \*1/\*1             |  \*1/\*1       |  \*1/\*1        |  \*1/\*1   |              |
| *DPYD*      | \*1/\*1             |  \*1/\*1       |  \*4/\*5        |  \*5/\*6   |              |


## License 

© 2017 Simon Fraser University, Indiana University Bloomington & Massachusetts Institute of Technology. All rights reserved.

**Aldy is NOT a free software.** Complete legal license is available in [LICENSE](LICENSE.md) file. 

For non-legal folks, here is TL;DR version:

- Aldy can be freely used in academic and non-commercial environments
- Please contact us if you intend to use Aldy for any commercial purpose


## Parameter documentation

**NAME**  

aldy — perform allelic decomposition and exact genotyping on next-generation sequencing data

**SYNOPSIS**  

```
aldy -h
aldy --test
aldy --license
aldy --generate-profile
aldy --show-cn --gene
aldy [--threshold THRESHOLD] [--profile PROFILE]
     [--gene GENE] [--verbosity VERBOSITY] [--log LOG]
     [--output OUTPUT] [--solver SOLVER] [--phase] [--cn CN]
     [file]
```

**OPTIONS**  

Positional arguments:
* `file`                  
    SAM, BAM, CRAM or DeeZ input file

Optional arguments:

*  `-h, --help `  
    Show the help message and exit  
*  `-T, --threshold THRESHOLD`  
    Cut-off rate for variations (percent per copy)  
    _default:_ `50`
*  `-p, --profile PROFILE`  
    Sequencing profile. Currently, only "illumina", "pgrnseq-v1" and "pgrnseq-v2" are supported. Please check `--generate-profile` for more information how to use your own profile  
*  `-g, --gene GENE`  
    Gene profile  
    _default:_ `CYP2D6`
*  `-v, --verbosity VERBOSITY`  
    Logging verbosity. Acceptable values are T (trace), D (debug), I (info) and W (warn)  
    _default:_ `I`
*  `-l, --log LOG`  
    Location of the output log file   
    _default:_ `[input].[gene].aldylog`
*  `-o, --output OUTPUT`  
    Location of the output file   
    _default:_ `[input].[gene].aldy`
*  `-s, --solver SOLVER`  
    IP Solver. Currently supported solvers are Gurobi and SCIP    
    _default:_ `any`
*  `-P, --phase`  
    Phase reads  
    _default:_ `no` (slows down the pipeline)
*  `--license`  
    Print Aldy license  
*  `--test`  
    Sanity-check on NA10860 sample
*  `--show-cn`  
    Show all copy number configurations supported by a gene (requires `-g`)
*  `-c, --cn CN`  
    Manually set copy number (input: a comma-separated list CN1,CN2,...). For a list of supported configurations, please run `aldy --show-cn`
*  `--generate-profile `   
    Generate the copy-number profile for the custom sequencing panel and print it on the standard output


## Contact & Bug Reports

[Ibrahim Numanagić](mailto:inumanag.at.mit.dot.edu)

If you have an urgent question, I suggest using e-mail: GitHub issues are not handled as fast as the email requests.
